We're now ready to
start talking more
in depth about the
CompletionStage methods.
But before we do that,
I want to talk about
how to group them into
different categories.
And the reason why
we want to do this
is, if you take a look
at the pie chart here,
you can see that about
2/3 of the 60-plus methods
in the CompletableFuture API
are CompletionStage methods.
So there are an
awful lot of them.
And it turns out that we
can further classify them
into three groups.
We can classify them in terms
of CompletionStage methods
that are triggered when one
previous stage finishes,
CompletionStage
methods that trigger
when both of two
previous stages trigger,
and CompletionStage methods
that trigger when either of two
previous stages are complete.
So those are the
three categories here.
And we'll break them
down in those ways.
We'll start by talking about
CompletionStage methods that
will be triggered and run when a
single previous stage finishes.
As you can see,
there's four of them.
But they also have
these async variants.
So there's really
about eight of them.
The methods are thenApply,
thenCompose, thenAccept,
and thenRun.
They take different types
of parameters, functions,
consumers, and runnables.
They all typically
will apply some action
as the result of
a previous stage.
And we'll talk
about those nuances
as we walk through them.
And then they return
various kinds of results.
They typically return
a CompletableFuture,
which, when completed,
will give you
the results of whatever
the behavior is.
So in the case of
thenApply, you'll
get back the results
of the function
when the function is
finished running, and so on.
Now, again, I'm going to talk
about all these things in more
detail.
So I'm not going to read all
the elements on the table.
This is just here for
you to see at a glance
what things group where.
There are some of the
methods, the ones that
don't have async as
their suffix, that
run in either the invoking
thread, or more likely,
in the same worker thread as
the previous stage that just
completed that triggered
these CompletionStage
methods to be called.
And which of those two
choices is actually used
depends on various
runtime factors we'll
talk about as we go along.
For sake of discussion, or
just to keep things moving,
usually these methods
run in the same thread
as the previous stage.
There's also a
parallel set of methods
that have the async suffix.
And these variants will
run in another thread
in the common ForkJoinPool.
So they don't run in the same
thread that just completed.
But they will be put
into the ForkJoinPool
and get a chance to compete for
other worker threads to run.
And there are pros
and cons of why
you might choose
to use async versus
non-async variants
of these methods
that we'll talk about later.
So those are the
methods that complete
when a single previous
stage is done.
They're the methods
that get called
when a single previous
stage completes.
There's also a set
of methods that
are called after the completion
of both of two previous stages.
So you can think
of those methods
as effectively being a
logical "and" operation.
And these methods include
thenCombine, thenAcceptBoth,
and runAfterBoth.
And for thenCombine
and thenAcceptBoth,
they take BiFunctions,
because they're going
to end up taking two inputs.
And they're going to
return to CompletableFuture
with the results of
calling various functions.
And so, again, we'll
talk about some
of these different methods.
As before, there's
both non-async versions
and async versions.
And the same behaviors accrue
as we talked about earlier.
The ones that are
non-async will typically
run in the thread of
the previous stage,
or one of the previous stages.
And the ones that
are async versions
will run in another
thread in the thread pool.
And then the final category of
these CompletionStage methods
are ones that complete after
either of two previous stages
complete.
So you can think of these
as basically being logical
"or" operations,
one or the other.
So whichever thing
finishes first,
then we'll run our action.
These methods include
applyToEither, acceptEither,
and runAfterEither.
And there's also corresponding
async variants of these.
And so, again, we'll look at
some examples of this stuff.
You can come back and
consult this table
to orient yourself if
you're writing code,
and you get lost as to which
method you're looking at
falls into which category.